# Conception: The twins, Ember and Coal

_August 6, 2019_

AI is best used in LISP

When I think of AI I draw an instant association with some a few persons who were core to the development of both the field and the LISP programmng language. Marvin Minksky, Patrick Winston, Howard Shrobe, Gerald Sussman, Richard Stallman. Each of these people were among the first users of LISP and it’s family of languages and rode it’s wave of popularity as Artificial Intelligence and robots were first becoming prominent. As years became decades they delved further into AI and LISP. Except for Stallman, after establishing himself as a unicorn by writing EMACS completely in LISP, he moved on to the support of free as in libre software. As the other three became researchers at MIT they attracted undergraduate and graduate students interested in the field of AI. These students joined the senior researchers in the pursuit of attempting to make the world’s most accurate model of the human experience. Of course the grad students used the same language as their seniors, LISP. The force of tenure is one of the strongest forces of nature, the poor scholars didn’t stand a chance. This enhanced the general belief that LISP is the best language for AI, and I don’t disagree. At one point it was. But I need to make a clarification for this section subtitle, “AI is easiest developed in the LISP Family”. There is no coincidence that AI and Lisp were founded but a few years apart. Many other languages have arisen and died since that time in the 1950’s and new fields and programming paradigms have evolved. LISP and Scheme themselves have remained constant. This is in substantial part due to the tenure force which binds teams of grad students to working in LISP on extraordinarily difficult problems. But it’s mostly due to the fact it’s highly structured syntax makes self executing and modifiable code easier to implement than other languages. This makes the LISP family the most efficient and extensible language for developing new algorithms.

So WE are not developing AI.

Other people are working on that and it’s taken them over 50 years just to get this far. And they’re much more experienced in this than any of us, seriously, who the fuck is going to tell Gerald Sussman that they know AI better than he? His tenure force would dissolve their atoms on the spot. Then his grad students would rebuild your atoms into something unspeakably distasteful. What we want to build something that uses AI, not build AI. Let me rephrase that, we want to build on the work that has been done, not repeat it. That’s how technology progresses, upon the work that came before, and restarting when necessary, but always forward. Here I would like to introduce the idea of information substrate, an idea presented to me by Joe Lubin. The idea that every piece of matter contains information, locked away. And in the future, on tic for tack or free exchange basis, matter will exchange data with each other. Energy has a cost, but in this world all matter can exchange data with each other and cover that cost. I suppose the energy pays for itself in some way through its constant destruction. Ethereum is a peer2peer decentralized distributed network (alot of libertarian tech buzzwords there) that seeks to facilitate this constant exchange of information (where constant approximates 12 seconds. Devices get faster and faster and gel closer to indistinguishable form constant time. Speed of travel, flicker rate of monitors, lag over the inernet. This is due to upper limit at the basic rate of perception for the average human of 2019 Earth Time....Kroprulu Sector. Communication does not have to be infinite to be perceptibly infinite. We will reach perceptibly infinite time in communication over the internet between devices. The internet and especially languages that contribute to the internet will be come especially important. I need a language that can communicate effectively over the internet accross devices.
Javascript.
Quite simply this language is topping the charts in language use and growth development. Looking at [this graph](https://adambard.com/blog/top-github-languages-2014/), err...table (a brief intermission of research suggests tables are not graphs). Javascript is becoming extremely popular with devices such as Google’s Chromebooks examining a market in people exclusively using the internet. Paired with the V8 Engine and Web Assembly this could lead to the first computer that runs in Javascript at the hardware level, creating a seamless experience between the hardware of two distinct computing devices. Seamless computing devices, remember that.. 

Ember and Coal

These twins have been conceived by me. Ember first in 2010 and then Coal in 2015. Ember is bright, active, but she goes out and must be relit. Coal has infinite but untapped potential and remains in the background for when he is needed. The two are inseparable, neither will be whole without the other because they are really one system tied together across machines over the internet. Ember moves with me, while Coal remains stationary. Due to his fixed location Coal is able to contact more matter for information and process more that information. Being mobile Ember can follow me to encounter new streams of data and to provide me with intelligence gained. WIth decentralized networks such as IPFS providing storage Whisper providing data transfer, and Ethereum providing payments, Coal could become a decentralized distributed processing network, like Flare, processing requests from me. At the sametime seamlessly integrating with other forms of himself and as the speed at which computers can process streams of data becomes near instant this integration will disappear from our perception. At the same time the link between Ember and Coal will tighten and the two will fuse as one. When the link between the human mind and Ember becomes instantaneous then we will have a full meshnet. A free flowing river of thoughts emotions and idea between consenting parties. Multiple identities will be allowed to freely manifest and identify themselves, making this not just a linkage between minds, but a Directed Acyclic Graph of human mind trees interconnecting with other human minds. with no need for a single locus of presence. Interconnected minds and machines, Biological computation will not go away, a source of data and information, which is a form of energy from that matter, will not dissapear any more than that matter itself may dissapear. Unlock the right pathway and an information in the universe and beyond can be found and processed. I find that a bit frightening, but it will probably happen anyway, no matter my feelings about it so I might as well join and enjoy the beautiful data.

- Ember and Coal.
