# Firescar's Failures Episode 1
August 6, 2019

  █████▒▄▄▄       ██▓ ██▓     █    ██  ██▀███  ▓█████   ██████ 
▓██   ▒▒████▄    ▓██▒▓██▒     ██  ▓██▒▓██ ▒ ██▒▓█   ▀ ▒██    ▒ 
▒████ ░▒██  ▀█▄  ▒██▒▒██░    ▓██  ▒██░▓██ ░▄█ ▒▒███   ░ ▓██▄   
░▓█▒  ░░██▄▄▄▄██ ░██░▒██░    ▓▓█  ░██░▒██▀▀█▄  ▒▓█  ▄   ▒   ██▒
░▒█░    ▓█   ▓██▒░██░░██████▒▒▒█████▓ ░██▓ ▒██▒░▒████▒▒██████▒▒
 ▒ ░    ▒▒   ▓▒█░░▓  ░ ▒░▓  ░░▒▓▒ ▒ ▒ ░ ▒▓ ░▒▓░░░ ▒░ ░▒ ▒▓▒ ▒ ░
 ░       ▒   ▒▒ ░ ▒ ░░ ░ ▒  ░░░▒░ ░ ░   ░▒ ░ ▒░ ░ ░  ░░ ░▒  ░ ░
 ░ ░     ░   ▒    ▒ ░  ░ ░    ░░░ ░ ░   ░░   ░    ░   ░  ░  ░  
             ░  ░ ░      ░  ░   ░        ░        ░  ░      ░  
                                                               

August 6, 2019


I hate a great many things, but most of all I hate myself. The Firescar's Failures series will chronicle ways in which I fail to achieve the tasks I was too incompetent to accomplish. Documenting them serves in three forms as a form of reflection, learning, and penitence. This first episode will be about DRM. Digital Rights Management, as it pertains to streaming video and audio.
<br/>

We work at a startup named [MTonomy](mtonomy.com). We are 3 software engineers and 1 marketing engineer, and 2 business/partnerships engineers. Next week Tuesday the fourth software developer will join us. All developers have taken semi-official ownership of some component of the system. My set of components includes our DRM implementation, I maintain the pipeline of the video as it is ingested into MTonomy's care, transcoded into multiple bitrates/resolutions, protected by DRM, and unpacked in a browser during playback.
<br/>

The was no fallout from this bug, but the ideology that led to it was dangerous. If the four workdays it took to diagnose and resolve had not been available, if the timeline for resolution had been more stringent... unfortunate outcomes would have occurred. Fortunately in this timeline the problem was resolved with four days to spare.
<br/>

I implemented version 1 of our DRM solution on the ides of January 2019. We use a five step process:
1. download the raw video
2. use [ffmpeg](https://ffmpeg.org) to convert arbitrary input video types to mp4 files using the h264 codec
3. use [mp4fragment](https://www.bento4.com) to generate fragmented mp4 files
4. use [mp4dash](https://www.bento4.com) to generate 2 second chunks of the original mp4 file
5. repeat steps 2-4 for each desired bitrates/resolutions and upload the segmented files

Within the first month after release a problem was revealed. Certain files, in particular .mov files using the Apple prores codec. Here ERROR1 arises. I erroneously diagnosed the problem as a fault with ffmpeg for the conversion between arbitraty input types and the desired output of mp4 files. I found another library. [HandBrake](https://handbrake.fr) that worked for .mov files, but not most other types and included it as a partial replacement for step 2 of the transcoding process. This led to version 2 of the system, which first tried to transcode with HandBrake and used ffmpeg as a fallback.
<br/>

ERROR2 was I never went back and attempted to diagnose the root cause of the failure of ffmpeg to process our files.  Given that HandBrake imports and utilizes ffmpeg the only excuse for my failure to investigate further is laziness. It is clear the problem with ffmpeg was in the space of solvable problems. At the same time I take no small amount of solace in the fact arriving at the solution took 4 days of work which was not feasible at the time of version 1 and version 2 implementation.
<br/>

The code operated flawlessly for months until this past week. 8 of the 30 films we received from a particular company were not processing correctly. These were high quality films, each 100GB masters, whearas most films we receive are closer to 3-8GB. When streamed they had a severe audio/video desynchronization. Further complicating the diagnosis of this bug was the desync only appeared after step 4, the chunking, but could not be concretely determined to be the fault of mp4dash. Furthermore, when videos were chunked but not encrypted all issues went away.

Attempts made to diagnose/resolve the bug:
<br/>

- replaced mp4dash with another piece of software, [MP4Box](https://gpac.wp.imt.fr/mp4box/)
- attempted each combination, ffmpeg with mp4dash, ffmpeg with mp4box, handbrake with mp4dash, handbrake with mp4box
- attempted every handbrake codec option
- ran diffs of the ffmpeg output of metadata of 2 correctly processing files and 1 incorrectly processing
- adjusted the ffmpeg profile/level configuration for video quality
- explictitly set the ffmpeg video codec for video (h264) and audio (aac)
- experimented with both the widevine and clearkey DRM standards
- looked through github issues to see if this was a common problem
- ran diffs between valid and faulty manifest files 
  - manifest files are a human readable metadata file that describe the available streams, bitrates, codecs, encryption standards, etc. and are used the web player to find the segmented video files
- checked understanding by manually editing a faulty manifest file to make it valid

<br/>

The final solution was very simple, a 16 character addition to our ffmpeg options, fixing the current audio desync, fixing the orignal bug with playback from February, and removing the necessity for HandBrake. Examination of the manifest file revealed a difference between codecs, with HandBrake transcoded videos appearing with a MIME type for an older version of the mp4 spec and ffmpeg producing a newer version. [This site](https://cconcolato.github.io/media-mime-support) was crucial to the solution. It reported my brower supporting the older version but not the newer version. From here it was a bit of intuition to determine the root cause. The high quality .mov files we received used a 10 bit color space not supported by browsers. HandBrake automatically downscaled videos to 8 bits, instructing ffmpeg to do the same with the flag `-pix_fmt yuv420p` resolved the issue.